so good afternoon today I'd like to
provide a brief update on where we are
in testing and hospitalizations and a
brief update on the advisory boards work
over the weekend yesterday we processed
almost 16,000 tests throughout the
Commonwealth bringing our total to over
three hundred and fifteen thousand tests
Sunday's test numbers with the highest
number of tests we've ever processed in
a single day since the pandemic began as
we all know ramping up testing
capabilities continues to be one of our
highest priorities and it's incredibly
important to the success of our
community tracing program both of which
will have a lot to do with the new
normal once we get there it's good to
see the total test numbers continue to
increase and I think as we talked last
week we added 18 community health
centers around the Commonwealth and key
locations to our testing community to
make sure that we would continue to test
in places where people felt we had
significant concerns there were 1824 new
confirmed kovat 19 tests in those in
that batch of tests which means about
12% of the tests that were conducted
were positive in the last seven days
positive test rates have come in under
20% every day seeing only 12 percent
positive rate what this round of testing
obviously continues that trend we
continue to hold daily calls with our
colleagues in the health care community
to closely monitor Hospital capacity
hospitalization rates for kovat and ICU
bed days for kovat as well as ICU rates
generally as of yesterday 300 3617
patients were hospitalized due to Kovan
this represents about 5% of the cases in
the Commonwealth kovat hospitalizations
have actually been decreasing in the
past several days with very few spikes
and new admissions the number of
patients dealing with kovat in the ICU
has also dropped to under a thousand to
nine
and for patience they're obviously still
thousands of people who are being
hospitalized due to this virus but the
numbers have started a trend in the
right direction it's also important to
note that different parts of the mess of
Massachusetts are in different stages at
this point in time with respect to the
pandemic
for example kovat hospitalizations and
ICU bed days related to kovat have gone
down in western mass and on the Cape
will remain high in Worcester and on the
south coast and flat in Boston that said
we have had some positive evidence with
respect to people get returning to the
hospitals into the healthcare system
generally who are dealing with chronic
and other medical conditions that have
nothing to do with kovat this is a
really good thing and that's a trend we
hope continues and as we've said before
many times if you are in fact dealing
with a chronic condition if you do
believe you're sick you should continue
to engage or begin to engage with your
clinician and your doctor and if you
feel very sick you should go to the IDI
the system is there people can treat you
the capacity exists and we don't want
people putting off necessary medical
procedures because they're concerned
about the system's ability to serve them
due to Kovan 19 the simple truth of the
matter is that is not the case and most
of the hospitals in Massachusetts are
serving far more people for reasons
other than kovat than serving the kovat
population we built it that way we
organized it that way we want people to
continue to access the system if they
need to we've also had tremendous
success with our telehealth program you
can always reach out to your clinician
by phone or through some sort of video
chat that is a covered benefit in
Massachusetts and hundreds of thousands
of those kinds of visits have taken
place over the course of the last 40
days people should continue to use that
if they need to reach out frontline
medical workers continue to be in many
respects terrific performers in all of
this and a
we talk to hospitals we've been pleased
to hear that for many of them they're
down to the lowest number of workers
they've had out due to Co vyd since
March I think was what we heard on that
call this morning and with everybody
else playing their work playing their
role and by staying home doctors and
nurses have been able to do the job they
need to do taking care of their sickest
patients we continue to chase down
personal protective equipment to ensure
the safety of our frontline health care
workers our nursing home workers our
emergency responders vulnerable
residents and others over the weekend we
joined with the other northeastern
states in a united front around
procuring PPE on a go-forward basis in a
more organized fashion so that we can
maximize our orders and bring in
quantities that we'll need for
healthcare workers Public Safety people
and others as we go forward and as of
yesterday we delivered over eight
million pieces of PPE including masks
gowns gloves and ventilators and we're
getting this gear to a variety of
organizations hospitals senior care
facilities and of course to our first
responders as well as we mentioned last
week the reopening Advisory Board
co-chaired by lieutenant governor Pulido
and by secretary Micha Neely has hit the
ground running under their leadership
the board made significant progress in
compiling feedback and ideas from
various industries and groups over the
course of the past few days over the
last week and through the weekend the
board engaged with our virtually met
with stakeholders from 23 different
industry associations and community
coalition's together these groups
represent over a hundred thousand
businesses and more than 1.4 million
workers from across the Commonwealth
these groups included representatives
from retail the high-tech sector life
sciences restaurants travel tourism and
lodging banking construction and
recreation the board also engaged with
the Black Economic Council the Latino
Chamber of Commerce and the end
CP in the next few days they plan to
meet with representatives from labor
gaming museums and cultural institutions
and sports organizations among others
the board has also received over 475
submissions of written testimony that
they're also going over now each group
has discussed the key issues that they
believe their industry or their region
will face and have emphasized the
specific guidance and information that
they're looking for from the
Commonwealth and from their local
governments in order to safely reopen
and as we discussed we're planning to
reopen in phases just as advised by the
federal government and others and as
other states are already starting to do
when the time is right what that means
is that the only sectors of the economy
that can implement the appropriate
health guidance will be opening in the
first phase there won't be anyone firing
a starting gun on May 18th and saying
everybody's off to the races but we do
hope that certain types of businesses
and workplaces will be able to begin
resuming operations under the guidelines
established through this process and
based on the fact that we will have hit
certain triggers with respect to the
status of the virus here in
Massachusetts child care and
transportation will continue to be key
enablers to ensure a safe and successful
reopening and the board is in the
process of developing what the next
steps would look like for those sectors
as well when the public health data
indicates the kovat 19 is on that
sustained downward trend that's been
discussed by so many previously we'll be
able to resume more and more activities
going forward but in the coming weeks
we're prepared to have more concrete
plans on what each phase of reopening
will look like where certain activities
and industries fit into which phase
general business guidance about social
distancing personal protection and
cleaning protocols that all businesses
will need to adhere to upon reopening
and Industry specific guidance and
protocols for reopening safely for those
that require it we're very grateful to
the many people across industries that
have had to close their
and adjust their on their lifestyles and
their work styles and their operations
to the unprecedented measures that we've
put in place
I think everybody's anxious to find a
way to safely and appropriately move
forward when we can get there and when
the data indicates that it's appropriate
to do so it's also important to remember
and I can't stress this enough that as
long as there is no vaccine we're gonna
have to be talking about how to do this
in a way that makes the most sense and
can be done most safely across all
sectors of our economy going forward
we'll plan to continue to ramp up
testing this will be something we'll
probably be talking about for months to
come we'll continue to invest in our
contact tracing program so that we'll be
in a position to identify people who
have in fact tested positive and to
contact their close contacts so that we
can then do the work that we need to do
to help those folks isolate and to
support them in their isolation this
will be a fundamental way for us to both
contain the disease and slow the spread
and we'll continue to work very closely
with our health care providers to
monitor and prepare for any kinds of
change in our surveillance activities
but the threat of future transmission
and illness is and will continue to be
with us for a very long time and we
should not forget that that's exactly
why we issued our face covering order
last week and I just want to say once
again with respect to that order the
main purpose behind a face covering if
you are not able to physically distance
yourself six feet or more from the
people you're around is to protect them
from you as much as it is to protect you
from them I can't stress enough that one
of the major issues associated with this
particular virus while it is brutal and
in some cases lethal for certain parts
of our population it has now been
documented that a very significant
portion of the people who actually
contract this virus will never show
symptoms at all and because of that
because such a large number of people
who are in fact carriers and there
or contagious can transmit this virus to
others without knowing that they're
doing it because they show no signs and
symptoms that they have it that face
covering is as much about protecting
other people from you as it is about
protecting you from other people and I
can't stress that one enough right now
we're going to continue to do everything
we can to continue to stop the spread
follow the data with respect to what it
tells us about what we can do with
regard to reopening when the time gets
there and make sure that we do this in a
correct planned and appropriate way and
I want to turn the podium over to the
lieutenant governor Thank You Gus and
good morning good afternoon to everyone
let me just start by giving you a bit of
an update about the work of the
reopening Advisory Board since launching
last week the board has met literally
through back-to-back zoom sessions I
just want to say how grateful we are
both secretary connealy and I in the
governor's office for this enormous
contribution that these individuals
business leaders industry leaders are
giving to our Commonwealth to analyze
study meet with listen to business
leaders and community leaders from all
over our Commonwealth
there was an it was a really interesting
weekend as the weather was beautiful
outdoors we were literally with each
other listening and then having time to
discuss what we heard back to back over
the course of those days and we'd become
like a family really supporting each
other getting to know one another and
it's really a it's a really incredible
process but but it's really just amazing
people smart talented engaged people
that are helping us make these decisions
as the governor said we've had the
opportunity to meet with the diversity
of our economy
in terms of from retail to restaurants
from the cdc's to real-estate groups to
the banking community and credit unions
to our black and Latino Commission
sharing their their thoughts and ideas
with us I have to say I'm extremely
impressed with the level of thinking
analysis and preparation that employers
are engaged with as they think about
what their workplace looks like in a
reopened kovat environment we've asked
them to present to us around their
readiness and given the particular
nature of their work some have a
readiness level that is different than
others we've asked them to talk about
the barriers in terms of how do they
make their workplace safer incorporating
in physical distancing how they're going
to do that what are the things they're
going to do to make their employees feel
comfortable and safer returning back to
work what are some of the key enablers
that they know are important for their
workforce to be able to even return to
work like as the governor said childcare
and transportation
we also heard a lot about remote work
the effectiveness of that and also the
longing for that personal physical
connection that comes with having a
workplace environment to share it and
engage with one another I'd also just
like to say that as we develop our ideas
with these business and community
leaders and with the members of the
advisory board it will be very similar
effort to what you've seen with the
Kovach command response it's a team
effort as secretary Sutter's has led
that team and really coordinated the
functions of that response it will be a
similar path forward working as a team
the advisory board are
administration and business and
community leaders all across our
Commonwealth and clearly working with
our municipal partners who ultimately
will be the ones to have to understand
what the safety provisions are for the
workplaces that do open up for services
and employment as time goes on as the
governor said I mean an amazing amount
of engagement the engagement comes with
these zoom presentations also comes with
one-on-one meetings and also reviewing
submissions that hundreds of people have
given to our cup to our board to look at
over a hundred thousand businesses 1.4
million workers from across the
Commonwealth so far I'd like to just
speak a little bit about what we've
heard there there seems to be some with
an understanding that may 18th is a
magical date May 18th is the date that
we said the report of this advisory
board will be released if you look at
other states around the country some
state governments have already issued a
reopening plans our plan will be
released on that date which will outline
a phased in reopening across our
Commonwealth and phased in means just
that some industry sectors will be more
ready than others and even within an
industry sector they might be components
of that industry that can begin first
and then eventually build out to full
capacity so that's what what May 18th is
it doesn't mean that the economy across
our Commonwealth will just reopened it's
just not possible as everybody knows
Safety's first employers are engaged and
it's it's a paramount importance that we
make sure that that the workforce is is
safer that people who do business with
these employers are safe in their
transactions and that we continue to
move forward and not have a a reverse
effect as we reopen in that safe manner
throughout our Commonwealth
I just like to also acknowledge that
we've heard from a lot of people so far
and we will continue to hear over the
course of this next week but there is a
level of anxiety and a level of in a
sense of urgency and in industry as
employers are struggling to make their
business operation you know continue to
operate in this environment so these are
indeed challenging times for the
business community of our Commonwealth
almost twenty four percent of our
workforce unemployed and we understand
the board understands our administration
understands that the work that we're
doing is really important but we need to
do it right it needs to be safe and it
needs to really reflect what we view is
is the proper and appropriate and safe
way to allow for more business
opportunities across our Commonwealth
when the time comes with that I'd like
to now turn it back over to the governor
temporarily yeah
well I think first of all the good news
with respect to the parts is people are
going there all right and I mean one of
the reasons we've been saying this even
when the way there wasn't great that it
was important for people to be able to
get outside that that's a big part of
mental and physical health and and the
fact that people use in the parks is a
good thing but the parks in many
respects need to behave and act to the
extent that they can on the same kinds
of terms that we've talked to other
businesses about with regard to distance
and and crowd control for lack of a
better word and and that does mean that
if a park believes it's getting to the
point where people are gonna have a hard
time maintaining any kind of distance
from one another they're gonna take that
just they're gonna make the decision to
temporarily close it that's always been
by the way standard operating procedure
at the parks the only thing that's
changed with regard to that is there's a
lot more people coming because I think
people want to be able to get out and
when you're operating under a stay at
home advisory
I think this becomes a very significant
opportunity and option for people and
the second thing is the parks need to be
a little more aggressive about how
crowded they believe they can get before
they need to do that but that's always
been something that's been part of their
portfolio
well so far with respect to beaches our
policy has been to not open up the
parking lots and that was just based
purely on the behavior that we saw when
they were open on a nice day and a week
over two not nice days over a weekend
where people were not abiding by or
paying any attention at all to the
distancing rules obviously this is
something that's gonna have to get
incorporated into the decisions that not
only we make but other states make that
are in our area one of the biggest
things that I've talked to other
governors about in our area is the whole
issue associated with public
recreational assets whether you're
talking beaches or parks or playgrounds
those are things we're all talking about
together because we know that for each
of us the decisions we make with regard
to how to operate those and how people
access them is going to matter over
state lines that's not a decision any of
us can make and expect not to have an
impact on others too
I mean look my my survey universe here
is not very big okay I don't get out
much but certainly in the universe that
I surveyed and had a chance to walk
around in there were a lot of people
wearing masks and or face coverings and
I did go into a into a pharmacy to buy
some stuff and I was wearing a mask when
I went in and everyone in the in the
pharmacy everyone was wearing a face
covering or a mask the people who worked
there were wearing them the people who
were shopping there were wearing him and
there was Plexiglas all over the place
to separate people from one another in
the appropriate places you would expect
it to be there I have not spoken to
anybody about this particular issue it's
one of those items that's on the on the
to-do list for today what I would say is
there is a whole series of
back-and-forth going on with respect to
what happened there and people need to
be careful about drawing conclusions one
way or another we have run into
situations in a number of nursing homes
where we have not been able to get
people who we would think would want to
get tested tested and that's one of the
reasons why under the command centers
130 million dollar nursing home package
if you want access to that package you
got to commit to test everybody and and
I we've run into this in a bunch of
different places where you would expect
that people who are in positions to be
concerned about
this stuff would want to be tested and
we've had to discipline some people for
not being tested in places where they
should probably be tested and I I think
people should embrace testing and I
certainly believe that as we go forward
we're gonna do a lot more testing and I
especially believe people that are in
essential and frontline positions should
want to be tested but I think this whole
testing thing is going to be as we roll
it out another one of those areas where
we may discover there some people who
for whatever reason don't want to be
tested and we're just gonna have to find
a way to work through that we're
currently working our way through the
part that we have the most direct
control over which is the correctional
operations and when we finish that we'll
start talking about other stuff I'm not
gonna speak to that because it's a
personnel matter but the fact of the
matter is not everybody wants to be
tested even people you would think would
would consider that to be an appropriate
thing given their rolling their
responsibilities
yeah the best experience we have with
respect to the unemployment trust fund
is what happened in 2009 and 2010
country went through a terrible
depression recession or whatever word
you want to use to describe it
most states all states I believe ended
up running out of resources during that
time states borrowed money from the most
part for the continued payment of
uninsurance unemployment insurance
claims for their residents and then once
the economy came back they started
paying it back and that's exactly how I
believe it's gonna work here and and
that means that people are going to get
paid on the unemployment assistance side
either through state funds or federal
funds depending upon which program
they're involved in but the resources
will be there
[Music]
they came in to visit with the reopening
Advisory Board and and their
presentations being taken under
consideration there are a lot of people
in Massachusetts who are paying an
enormous price financially and
economically for this particular
pandemic and we made decisions based on
what we thought we're in the best health
the p-n safety of the people in
Massachusetts
I can't speak to the particular zuv any
individual decision what I can tell you
is that we've been involved in a very
almost case specific process with a
special master who was put onto this
task by the Supreme Judicial Court in
Massachusetts and over the course of the
past forty five fifty days roughly
eleven hundred people have been either
medically paroled paroled or if they
were on a pre trial basis released out
of the houses of Correction but it's
been my understanding that almost every
decision that's been made during the
course of this process has been on
individual circumstances involving
particular individuals now I do know
that in in many places in Massachusetts
there have been District Attorney's and
others who have raised issues with
respect to particular individuals that
they did not believe could be safely
returned to the community but our our
goal and our role in this has been to
work as collaboratively as we can with
the courts and with the Special Master
to make it possible for those people who
we believe there are slots and places
for them to go on medical parole or
traditional parole to be released
accordingly and then supervised once
they go out the stuff associated with
pretrial which happens through the
through the D of the houses of
Correction in the sheriff's I'm not as
familiar with but there are certainly
folks who've been released
where it was definitely over the
objections of the of the of the District
Attorney's and local law enforcement
yeah
[Music]
well look I think all of us believe
collectively here that the decisions
that we've made were the ones we felt
were the best among bad choices okay and
and we made them based on science and
guidance that we got from people who
study pandemics and infectious diseases
in many different places and we pursued
a strategy that was quite consistent
with the strategy that was pursued in
many other places that managed to
actually get the virus to the point
where they could start thinking about
reopening again but we've always said
that from the first minute we made the
first decisions on this that we knew the
economic impact of this and the
dislocation and the dismay and the loss
of purpose and all the other things that
were going to come with that we're gonna
be significant and that's one of the
reasons why we've worked so hard to
crank an unemployment insurance system
up that was certainly not prepared or
had ever had to deal with the kind of
volume that those folks have been
dealing with over the course of the past
several weeks we do believe and buy into
the guidance that we've gotten from
experts in the field that you need to
see downward trends in a number of key
indices associated with this virus for
some period of time before you can
actually reopen and that's the reason
why we created the reopening task force
and it's why we've spent so much time
working with our colleagues in the
healthcare community to develop a set of
indices that we report on every single
day and as I said in my remarks you know
after a really long time of not seeing
much positive traction
at all with regard to those measures in
the course for the past few days we've
actually started to see some positive
downward trends they came in they met
with the reopening Advisory Board and
we'll take our guidance as we will on
many of these issues from them
well keep in mind that when there are a
whole bunch of things that came with the
130 million I should probably let the
secretary speak to this but there are a
bunch of assessments at test stations
and other elements of of those
particular sort of what the state of
play is in the nursing home industry not
just generally but facility by facility
by facility that came along with that
130 million to basically do the sorts of
things that I think we all believe
needed to happen in almost every single
one do you want to speak to the
specifics on that good afternoon
so of the hundred and thirty million
dollars in this round there's 27 28
specific metrics that the nursing homes
have to one they have to first attest to
and then we have clinical auditors they
actually today's Monday they actually
start going out today to serve take the
self attestation from the nursing homes
and do their own boots-on-the-ground
analysis and surround it's not just
deaths but it is around if you remember
we talked about PPE so nursing homes
having the appropriate amounts of PPE
infection control policies in place
being able to bring back their workers
having the sufficient staffing in their
in their units and being able to in
their facilities as well as creating
kovat positive and co vyd negative or
kovat a symptomatic units and being able
to have staff who no longer float in a
nursing home but be able to work with
dedicated units and the nursing homes
are being sort of rated like a you know
green yellow red and that data should be
available around May 15th and we've made
a commitment to making it public so it's
not just obviously deaths are you want
to we want to turn that trend that about
58 percent of our deaths from Kovac 99
are
don't care facilities but it's really
around infection control PPE working
with the Union 1199 and others to really
ensure that we have a safe environment
for our residents and our staff to be
able to work so the data that I report
publicly is who tests positive as to m
and not the public reporting day is not
symptomatic and asymptomatic but since I
come back to this regularly
let me check to see how it's broken out
by any symptomatic and symptomatic
that's a really that's a tough question
to answer because you'd have to get to
the point where you were comfortable
that I mean first of all I don't think
anybody disputes the fact that that
policy as painful as it is has made a
big difference with respect to keeping
people safe
given the asymptomatic nature of the
illness that we're talking about here
which by the way was not really fully
understood or appreciated until I'm
gonna say the middle to the end of March
which based on a lot of the data we know
about would have been somewhere between
70 and 90 days after Kovac probably was
already here I think so I think the
follow-up to your point Bruce is that
for for the nursing home space in
particular we need to come up with a
game plan virtually for every provider
based on where they are and how they're
organized and what they're doing and and
then use the resources that are
available to make sure
implement that plan with them across
their organization whether it's one home
two homes or three homes or whatever and
make sure that everybody's basically
playing by that same set of guidance and
has the PPE and the staffing and all the
rest that's required to make sure that
they implement it but I don't have a
good answer to your question because
it's a huge risk no matter how you frame
it for for that population
well you got to remember and I've talked
about this before that we're in a very
different place than most other states
we're number three basically behind New
York in terms of Penn New Jersey in
terms of both cases and deaths and and
and four four states that literally
don't have and haven't had a significant
penetration with respect to kovat either
because for whatever reason they they
operate on a different timetable than we
do now
in all of those states they're all
they're all the opening under orders and
guidance with respect to ensuring that
their environments if the work
environments are safe and that people
are pursuing what we all would describe
as sort of best practices and and I
think you're gonna see a fair amount of
uniformity around that there'll be
differences between in among states on
the margin but generally speaking people
are gonna be playing by most of the same
rules but it's pretty hard to compare
the state of play in some of the states
that were hardest hit by this against
some of the states that simply never had
anywhere near the kind of penetration
that the hardest hit States hardest hit
States had and that's one of the reasons
why I think the Fed said here's our
guidance with respect to making
decisions about reopening and how
reopening should look and how it should
work but we get the fact that states are
gonna operate on a different clock based
on their own personal experience and
where they are and you know to take it
back one of the major the most
fundamental issue for states to get
around to executing on a reopening
strategy was you have to show a
demonstrated trend over a significant
period of time of downward movement most
of the key indicators that are
associated with the presence of the
virus and I don't think there's a state
in the country that's not relying on or
respecting that fact and in fact
Mississippi which had been making moves
toward reopening based on
recent data with respect to positive
test cases and deaths stopped and
basically said we're not going to reopen
on the date that we said we were gonna
reopen because we no longer have the
trend data that's moving in the
direction we thought it was moving in
and I think that's appropriate I don't
want to bring this thing back you know
whatever we do here I want to make sure
it doesn't happen again
[Music]
Massachusetts is not a very big place
okay and and as I said in my remarks our
coast which is right down the street
from Cape Cod at a very bad week last
week I don't think it makes a lot of
sense in a state that's as small as ours
where people can move around to think
about any of this stuff on anything of
an estate wide basis I want to take a
place that seems to be making progress
and create a problem for them if you
were to talk to the folks in Worcester
which also have seen significant
increases over the course of the past
ten days they would say some of that has
to do with Worcester but some of it has
to do also with some of the surrounding
areas and I think it's really important
for us to keep that in mind
Thanks